APPS-1032 delay workspace destruction (#325)
dnanexus/dxCompiler: doc/ExpertOptions.md

| Option   |  Description |
| ------   | ------------ |
| archive  | Archive older versions of applets.|

> | compileMode [IR, NativeWithoutRuntimeAsset, All] | Compilation mode - If not specified, the compilation mode is "All" and the compiler will translate and compile the workflow file into applications that are bundled with runtime asset.Use "IR" if you only want to translate the file and generatethe DNAnexus JSON input file from a standard-formatted onewithout compilation, or use "NativeWithoutRuntimeAsset" if you don't want to package the runtime asset with generated applications.|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| compileMode [IR, NativeWithoutRuntimeAsset, All] | Compilation mode - If not specified, the compilation mode is "All" and the compiler will translate and compile the workflow file into applications that are bundled with runtime asset. Use "IR" if you only want to translate the file and generate the DNAnexus JSON input file from a standard-formatted one without compilation. Use "NativeWithoutRuntimeAsset" if you don't want to package the runtime asset with generated applications (i.e. the compiler will create the applications on the platform but the runtime asset will not be specified as their dependency).|
```

Adding this since to me it suggested that we somehow package the applications with the asset (into one jar)..

> | compileMode [IR, NativeWithoutRuntimeAsset, All] | Compilation mode - If not specified, the compilation mode is "All" and the compiler will translate and compile the workflow file into applications that are bundled with runtime asset. Use "IR" if you only want to translate the file and generate the DNAnexus JSON input file from a standard-formatted one without compilation. Use "NativeWithoutRuntimeAsset" if you don't want to package the runtime asset with generated applications (i.e. the compiler will create the applications on the platform but the runtime asset will not be specified as their dependency).|

Reviewer 2: What's the use of NativeWithoutRuntimeAsset?  If it's just for internal debugging purposes, I'd rather not go into details.

Author: It is used in tests but you are right maybe it is just for internal use. But I think we need to at least add info about the 'IR' mode here.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| compileMode [All, IR] | Compilation mode - If not specified, the compilation mode is "All" and the compiler will translate WDL or CWL inputs into DNAnexus workflows and tasks.  Use "IR" if you only want to parse CWL or WDL files and convert standard-formatted input files to DNAnexus JSON input format without performing full compilation.|
```

| ------- | ----------- |
| folder \<string> | Platform folder (defaults to '/'). |
| project \<string\> | Platform project (defaults to currently selected project).

> | language \<string\> \[ver\] | Which language to use? May be WDL or CWL. You can optionally specify a version. Currently: i. WDL: draft-2, 1.0, and 1.1, and ii. CWL: 1.2 are supported and WDL development is partially supported. The default is to auto-detect the language from the source file. The default is to auto-detect the language from the source file.

Reviewer: It looks like "The default is to auto-detect the language from the source file." is repeated.

### Extras 

> The `-extras` command line option takes an additional JSON file to set or override metadata and runtime attributes of workflows and tasks during compilation. See [Setting DNAnexus-specific attributes in extras.json](#setting-DNAnexus-specific-attributes-in-extras.json) for details on how to write the extras file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `-extras` command line option takes an additional JSON file to set or override metadata and runtime attributes of workflows and tasks during compilation. See [Setting DNAnexus-specific attributes in extras.json](#setting-dnanexus-specific-attributes-in-extrasjson) for details on how to write the extras file.
```

Without this the link doesn't seem to work.

## Describe WDL workflow to obtain execution tree

> You can describe a dnanexus workflow that was compiled by dxCompiler to get an execution tree presentating the workflow. The execution tree will include information on the executables in the workflow (applets and subworkflows). By default, the execution tree is return as JSON. You can supply a `-pretty` flag to return a pretty print. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can describe a DNAnexus workflow that was compiled by dxCompiler to get an execution tree presentating the workflow. The execution tree will include information on the executables in the workflow (applets and subworkflows). By default, the execution tree is return as JSON. You can supply a `-pretty` flag to return a pretty print. 
```

  * `contactEmail`
  * `contactOrg`
  * `contactUrl`

>   * `contactEmail`

Reviewer 2: mentioned on line 580
```suggestion
```

examined once in sequential order, then this can be optimized by
streaming instead. The Unix `cat`, `wc`, and `head` commands are of
this nature. To specify that a file is to be streamed, mark it as such
in the `parameter_meta` section. For example:

```wdl
task head {
    File in_file
    Int num_lines

    parameter_meta {
        in_file : "stream"
    }
    command {
        head -n ${num_lines} ${in_file}
    }
    output {
        String result = read_string(stdout())
    }
}
```

File streaming is an optimization, and there are limiting rules to its
correct usage. The file must be accessed only once, in sequential
order, from the beginning. It need not be read to the end. If the task
does not keep this contract, it could fail in unexpected ways.

Some tasks have empty command sections. For example, the `fileSize`
task (below) calculates the size of a file, but does not need to
download it.  In such cases, the input files are downloaded lazily,
only if their data is accessed.

```wdl
task fileSize {
    File in_file

    command {}
    output {
        Float num_bytes = size(in_file)
    }
}
```

## Task Runtime and Hints

### Instance type

> A task declaration has a runtime section where [native WDL runtime attributes(https://github.com/openwdl/wdl/blob/main/versions/1.1/SPEC.md#mandatory-runtime-attributes)] can be specified to customize its execution environment on the DNAnexus platform. Based on these attributes, an instance type is chosen by

Reviewer: The link seems to be broken here.

the compiler. If you wish to choose an instance type from the
DNAnexus [native](https://documentation.dnanexus.com/developer/api/running-analyses/instance-types)
list, this can be done by specifying the `dx_instance_type` key
instead. For example:

```
runtime {
   dx_instance_type: "mem1_ssd2_x4"
}
```

If you want an instance that has a GPU chipset, set the `gpu` attribute to true. For example:
```
runtime {
   memory: "4 GB"
   cpu : 4
   gpu : true
}
```

> CWL provides a different set of runtime attributes used in the ResourceRequirement, and an DNAnexus instance type will be chosen accordingly. Recognized attributes and its mapping to WDL is listed [here](CWL_v1.2.0_to_WDL_v1.md###requirements)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CWL provides a different set of runtime attributes used in the ResourceRequirement, and a DNAnexus instance type will be chosen accordingly. Recognized attributes and its mapping to WDL is listed [here](CWL_v1.2.0_to_WDL_v1.md###requirements).
```

### Addtional DNAnexus-specific runtime settings

> There are several parameters that also affect the runtime environment specified in the dxapp.json file https://documentation.dnanexus.com/developer/api/running-analyses/io-and-run-specifications#run-specification:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are several parameters that also affect the runtime environment and can be specified in the [runSpec section](https://documentation.dnanexus.com/developer/api/running-analyses/io-and-run-specifications#run-specification) of the native app's `dxapp.json` file:
```

> There are several parameters that also affect the runtime environment specified in the dxapp.json file https://documentation.dnanexus.com/developer/api/running-analyses/io-and-run-specifications#run-specification:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are several parameters that also affect the runtime environment specified in the dxapp.json file https://documentation.dnanexus.com/developer/api/running-analyses/io-and-run-specifications#run-specification:
```

There are several parameters that also affect the runtime environment and can be specified in the [dxapp.json](https://documentation.dnanexus.com/developer/api/running-analyses/io-and-run-specifications#run-specification) file of a native app:

* `runSpec.executionPolicy`: Specifies when to try to automatically restart failed jobs, and how many times
* `runSpec.timeoutPolicy`: Specifies the maximum amount of time the job can run

> * `access`: Specifies which resources the applet can access

Author: Here I added the "runSpec." to note that these attrs need to be speciified under the key `runSpec` in extras,json
https://github.com/dnanexus/dxCompiler/blob/140a1c6f3e71ad6fd2072bbf794321daa5f851a3/doc/ExpertOptions.md#L1115-L1121
However `runSpec` and `access` and `ignoreReuse` are keys on the same level, so access should not be put under `runSpec`
https://documentation.dnanexus.com/developer/apps/app-metadata
But our current implementation of both `dx_access` in wdl file and `access` in extras.json are regarding access as a runtime attributes.
https://github.com/dnanexus/dxCompiler/blob/b0b0dab11eb203e71975eccb9fe25db0192a5400/compiler/src/main/scala/dx/translator/wdl/RuntimeTranslator.scala#L39
https://github.com/dnanexus/dxCompiler/blob/dd74c091f2ce2286c947dc334eb996fbdbc065b9/compiler/src/main/scala/dx/translator/Extras.scala#L449-L451

Author: @commandlinegirl I think it is something to be fixed but not in this PR :(

Reviewer: That's all right, even better. Thanks!

* `ignoreReuse`: Specifies whether to allow the outputs of the applet to be reused

> These attributes can also be specified in the `runtime` section of the WDL task, but their representation there is slightly different than in dxapp.json. Also note that the runtime section is different than the metadata section when it comes to attribute values - specifically, object values must be prefixed by the `object` keyword, and mapped values must have their keys in quotes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These attributes can be specified in the `runtime` section of the WDL task, but their representation there is slightly different than in `dxapp.json`. Also note that the runtime section is different than the metadata section when it comes to attribute values - specifically, object values must be prefixed by the `object` keyword, and mapped values must have their keys in quotes.
```

   gpu : true
}
```
CWL provides a different set of runtime attributes used in the [ResourceRequirement](https://www.commonwl.org/v1.2/CommandLineTool.html#ResourceRequirement), and a DNAnexus instance type will be chosen accordingly. Recognized attributes and its mapping to WDL are listed [here](CWL_v1.2.0_to_WDL_v1.md#requirements).

### Additional DNAnexus-specific runtime settings

> There are several parameters that also affect the runtime behaviour of an applet and can be be supplied upon its creation in its [dxapp.json file](https://documentation.dnanexus.com/developer/apps/app-metadata#annotated-example):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are several parameters that also affect the runtime behavior of an applet and can be supplied upon its creation in its [dxapp.json file](https://documentation.dnanexus.com/developer/apps/app-metadata#annotated-example):
```

  }
}
```
# Workflow metadata

Similar to tasks, workflows can also have `meta` AND `parameter_meta` sections that contain arbitrary workflow-level metadata. dxCompiler recognizes the following `meta` attributes and uses them when generating the native DNAnexus workflow:

* `title`: A short title for the workflow. If not specified, the task name is used as the title.
* `summary`: A short description of the workflow. If not specified, the first line of the description is used (up to 50 characters or the first period, whichever comes first).
* `description`: A longer description of the workflow.
* `types`: An array of DNAnexus [types](https://documentation.dnanexus.com/developer/api/data-object-lifecycle/types).

> * `tags`: An array of strings that will be added as tags on the generated applet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `tags`: An array of strings that will be added as tags on the generated workflow.
```

> * `properties`: A hash of key-value pairs that will be added as properties on the generated applet. Both keys and values must be strings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `properties`: A hash of key-value pairs that will be added as properties on the generated workflow. Both keys and values must be strings.
```

* `details`: A hash of workflow details. The only key that is specifically recogized is `whatsNew`, and the formatting is handled for workflows the same way as it is for tasks.

The workflow `parameter_meta` section supports the same attributes as the task `parameter_meta` section.

# Setting DNAnexus-specific attributes in extras.json

When writing a DNAnexus applet the user can specify options through the [dxapp.json](https://documentation.dnanexus.com/developer/apps/app-metadata#annotated-example) file. The dxCompiler equivalent is the _extras_ file, specified with the `-extras` command line option.

The following first-level keys are accepted in the _extras_ file:
* `defaultRuntimeAttributes`: native WDL/CWL runtime attributes

> * `defaultTaskDxAttributes` and `perTaskDxAttributes`: metadata and runtime attributes as default or of specific task

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `defaultTaskDxAttributes` metadata and runtime attributes defaults for tasks
* `perTaskDxAttributes`: metadata and runtime attributes for specific tasks that override defaultTaskDxAttributes.
```

> * `defaultWorkflowDxAttributes` and `perWorkflowDxAttributes`: metadata and runtime attributes as default or of specific workflow

Reviewer 2: similar to above.

* `dockerRegistry`: private registry configuration. See [Private registries](##private-registries])

> * `customReorgAttributes`: custom reorganization applet URI and its configuration. See [Adding config file based reorg alet at compilation time](##adding-config-file-based-reorg-applet-at-compilation-time)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `customReorgAttributes`: custom reorganization applet URI and its configuration. See [Adding config file based reorg applet at compilation time](##adding-config-file-based-reorg-applet-at-compilation-time)
```

> * `ignoreReuse`: boolean value indicating whether to skip current execution and reuse the results from the previous one. See [Job reuse](##job-reuse)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `ignoreReuse`: boolean value indicating whether to disable [job reuse](##job-reuse)
```

> * `delayWorkspaceDestruction`: boolean value indicating whether to keep the job's temporary workspace after execution. See [Delay workspace destruction](##delay-workspace-destruction)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `delayWorkspaceDestruction`: boolean value indicating whether to delay the destruction of the job's temporary workspace after execution. See [Delay workspace destruction](##delay-workspace-destruction)
```

If one attribute is specified multiple times, its final value will be retrieved from the following sources and the latter (if exists) will override the former: 
* `defaultTaskDxAttributes`/`defaultWorkflowDxAttributes` in extras.json
* task/workflow metadata/runtime section
* `perTaskDxAttributes`/`perWorkflowDxAttributes` in extras.json

> \* Note: the first-level keys in the extras file have been changed to camel case; however, all the old keys (v2.1.0 and earlier) are still recoginzed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
\* Note: the first-level keys in the extras.json file have been changed to camel case; however, all the old keys (v2.1.0 and earlier) are still recoginzed.
```

Author: I guess It is not necessary to be named as `extras.json`, right?

Reviewer: It's not, we can leave it as is.

## Default and per-task attributes

> The extras file has a `defaultTaskDxAttributes` section where runtime properties `executionPolicy`, `timeoutPolicy`, and `access` control) can be set as `runSpec` attributes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The extras file has a `defaultTaskDxAttributes` section where `executionPolicy`, `timeoutPolicy`, and `access` `runSpec` attributes can be set.
```

will override the default timeout for tasks `Add` and `Inc`. It will also provide `UPLOAD` instead of `VIEW` project access to `Inc`.

You are also able to specify metadata for tasks in the `defaultTaskDxAttributes` and `perTaskDxAttributes` sections, including adding citation or license information.

The full set of attributes that may be specified are:

> * title

Reviewer 2: I might be missing something, but where did this section go?  I don't see it on the right side of the diff.

Author: it is linked to the task meta section above. See line 1160 on the right.

Reviewer 2: I don't see any mention of for example developerNotes at line 1160.
In fact, `git show 483d1523aa8e21f7a6553ac1693cdcfb36123367:doc/ExpertOptions.md` shows the usage of developerNotes in the global workflow section.
So were did the list of all the settable attributes go?

Author: in line 1160 I put a link pointing to https://github.com/dnanexus/dxCompiler/blob/fcbd5d1c1c376456e0715992b02cecd53d298d28/doc/ExpertOptions.md?plain=1#L566-L590
but there might be a caveat that in extras.json the keys are in camel case `developerNotes`, but in the meta section in wdl it is using underscore `developer_notes`.

Reviewer 2: Great!  Please add this caveat and an example of developerNotes to the docs.

}
```

will override the default task timeout and `dx_timeout` in the runtime section of tasks `Add` and `Inc`. It will also provide `UPLOAD` instead of `VIEW` project access to `Inc`.

> You are also able to specify metadata for tasks in the `defaultTaskDxAttributes` and `perTaskDxAttributes` sections, including adding citation or license information. The full set of attributes that may be specified are those allowed in the [dxapp.json](https://documentation.dnanexus.com/developer/apps/app-metadata) file.

Author: @emiloslavsky I added additional comments here to address that here the attribute names should be the same as in dxapp.json, and another comment in line 568 to note the different representation of attrs:
https://github.com/dnanexus/dxCompiler/blob/14d33109765b365805646adf86941660bb563473/doc/ExpertOptions.md?plain=1#L564-L592

Reviewer 2: https://documentation.dnanexus.com/developer/apps/app-metadata has inputSpec, resources, ignoreReuse.  Are all these supported?  If not may be say something like 
```suggestion
You are also able to specify metadata for tasks in the `defaultTaskDxAttributes` and `perTaskDxAttributes` sections, including adding citation or license information. The full set of recognized attributes is listed in [task meta](#meta-section) with snake_case fields converted to camelCase to agree with [dxapp.json](https://documentation.dnanexus.com/developer/apps/app-metadata) syntax (e.g.  `developer_notes` and `open_source` meta attributes are specified as `developerNotes` and `openSource` in `extras.json`).
```

      "scatterDefaults": {
        "chunkSize": 100
      },
      "scatters": {
          "sample_files.file": {
          "chunkSize": 700

>         }

Author: https://github.com/dnanexus/dxCompiler/blob/dd74c091f2ce2286c947dc334eb996fbdbc065b9/compiler/src/main/scala/dx/translator/Extras.scala#L383-L387

Author: Also in the test files:
https://github.com/dnanexus/dxCompiler/blob/9b0e5c7a8f366ea0f7e24190b1635c042453e3d9/compiler/src/test/resources/nested/extras/four_levels_extras1.json#L1-L14

>   "ignoreReuse" : true

Reviewer 2: in extras.json?

Author: It is part of "using the extras" section. But I added it to make the instruction clearer :)

}
```
This will be applied to the top-level workflow, sub-workflows, and applets during compilation, and used for all jobs/analyses during execution (which is equivalent to using `--ignore-reuse` flag with `dx run`). 

## Delay workspace destruction

> When calling a workflow with `dx run`, jobs and analyses launched by this workflow will have their temporary workspaces to store resources and intermediate outputs. By default, when a job/analysis has transitioned to a terminal state (done, failed, or terminated), its workspace will be destroyed and garbage collected by the system. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When calling a workflow with `dx run`, jobs and analyses launched by this workflow will have their temporary workspaces to store resources and intermediate outputs. By default, when a job or an analysis has transitioned to a terminal state (done, failed, or terminated), its temporary workspace will be destroyed by the system. 
```

> If you wish to leave them around longer (around 3 days) after executing the workflow, two things needs to be done:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you wish to delay the destruction of these temporary workspaces by and keep them around longer (around 3 days) after executing the workflow, two things needs to be done:
```

1. Add this setting to the top-level of the extras.json:

```
{
  "delayWorkspaceDestruction" : true
}
```
This will guarantee the workspace containers of all jobs that spawned from the parent jobs (e.g. in scatters) during workflow execution to remain intact after the analysis.

2. When running the workflow use `--delay-workspace-destruction` flag:
```
dx run YOUR_WORKFLOW --delay-workspace-destruction
```

> This will guarantee the root analysis and the jobs/analyses as its stages will have their workspaces kept intact for longer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This will guarantee the root analysis and its stages will have their workspace destruction delayed.
```

> Taking both steps will ensure all of your workflow containers are not immediately destroyed regardless of whether the analysis succeeds or fails, and will allow you to view the stored data objects for debugging purposes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Taking both steps will ensure all of your workflow containers are not immediately destroyed regardless of whether the analysis succeeds or fails, and will allow you to view the data objects stored in the workflow workspace containers for debugging purposes.
```

  "ignoreReuse" : true
}
```

> This will be applied to the top-level workflow, sub-workflows, and tasks during compilation, and used for all jobs/analyses during execution (which is equivalent to using `--ignore-reuse` flag with `dx run`). 

Author: related test: https://github.com/dnanexus/nucleus/blob/b60c2d7729f0bef23d466cd811c43842ae70a218/jobmanager/test/src/analysis_handler_tests._js#L2540

Author: Implementation:
https://github.com/dnanexus/nucleus/blob/c2f73f66e35f4b550f560ac3b6d06eee8046f84e/apiserver/execution/exec_handlers/base._js#L320-L348
https://github.com/dnanexus/nucleus/blob/164c088c9fb7f09490ec7cfbfed9b14df11ce3fa/apiserver/execution/exec_handlers/workflows._js#L144-L167

}
```

This will be applied to the top-level workflow, sub-workflows, and tasks during compilation.

> However, since it is a runtime option, compiling your workflow with this attribute set to true will only guarantee the workspaces of subjobs (that sprawn from the parent job) to remain intact for around 3 days after the analysis. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, since it is a runtime option, compiling your workflow with this attribute set to true will only guarantee the workspaces of subjobs (that sprawn from the parent jobs, which correspond to tasks) to remain intact after the analysis. 
```

And I'd mention the time somewhere above, e.g. at the top:

By default, temporary workspaces hold the results of executed workflows and applets. Normally, these are garbage collected by the system. If you wish to leave them around longer (around 3 days) for debugging purposes, please use:

> However, since it is a runtime option, compiling your workflow with this attribute set to true will only guarantee the workspaces of subjobs (that sprawn from the parent job) to remain intact for around 3 days after the analysis. 

Author: implementation:
https://github.com/dnanexus/nucleus/blob/164c088c9fb7f09490ec7cfbfed9b14df11ce3fa/apiserver/execution/exec_handlers/executions._js#L84-L88
only as a job input argument but not one used when building executables.

Reviewer: Yes, thanks! It can be set both on an analysis and a job.

> To keep the parent job's workspace, you still need to run the top-level workflow with the runtime flag `--delay-workspace-destruction`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To keep the parent jobs' workspaces, you still need to run the top-level workflow with the runtime flag `--delay-workspace-destruction`.
```

> To keep the parent job's workspace, you still need to run the top-level workflow with the runtime flag `--delay-workspace-destruction`.

Author: Are we having only more than one root parent job for each `dx run`? I think the flag only applies to the root that we `dx run` then propagates to all sub jobs/analyses.

To keep the parent job's workspace, you still need to run the top-level workflow with the runtime flag `--delay-workspace-destruction`.

```
dx run YOUR_WORKFLOW --delay-workspace-destruction
```

> # Workflow metadata

Author: moved upwards
